The most straightforward
way to improve performance
is to reduce the propagation
delay of a circuit.
Let’s look at a perennial
performance bottleneck:
the ripple-carry adder.
To fix it, we first have to
figure out the path from inputs
to outputs that has the largest
propagation delay, i.e.,
the path that’s determining
the overall t_PD.
In this case that path
is the long carry chain
following the carry-in
to carry-out path
through each full adder module.
To trigger the path add -1 and
1 by setting the A inputs to all
1’s and the B input to all 0’s
except for the low-order bit
which is 1.
The final answer is 0, but
notice that each full adder has
to wait for the carry-in
from the previous stage
before it produces
0 on its sum output
and generates a carry-out
for the next full adder.
The carry really does
ripple through the circuit
as each full adder in
turn does its thing.
To total propagation
delay along this path
is N-1 times the carry-in
to carry-out delay
of each full adder,
plus the delay
to produce the final
bit of the sum.
How would the overall
latency change
if we, say, doubled the
size of the operands, i.e.,
made N twice as large?
It’s useful to summarize the
dependency of the latency on N
using the “order-of” notation
to give us the big picture.
Clearly as N gets
larger the delay
of the XOR gate at the end
becomes less significant,
so the order-of notation ignores
terms that are relatively less
important as N grows.
In this example, the
latency is order N,
which tells us that
the latency would
be expected to
essentially double
if we made N twice as large.
The order-of notation,
which theoreticians
call asymptotic
analysis, tells us
the term that would dominate
the result as N grows.
The yellow box contains
the official definition,
but an example might make it
easier to understand what’s
happening.
Suppose we want to characterize
the growth in the value
of the equation n^2 +
2n + 3 as n gets larger.
The dominant term is clearly n^2
and the value of our equation
is bounded above and below
by simple multiples of n^2,
except for finitely
many values of n.
The lower bound is
always true for n greater
than or equal to 0.
And in this case, the upper
bound doesn’t hold only for n
equal to 0, 1, 2, or 3.
For all other positive values of
n the upper inequality is true.
So we’d say this
equation was “order N^2”.
There are actually two variants
for the order-of notation.
We use the Theta
notation to indicate
that g(n) is bounded above AND
below by multiples of f(n).
The “big O” notation is used
when g(n) is only bounded above
by a multiple of f(n).
Here’s a first attempt
at improving the latency
of our addition circuit.
The trouble with the
ripple-carry adder
is that the high-order
bits have to wait
for the carry-in from
the low-order bits.
Is there a way in which we can
get high half the adder working
in parallel with the low half?
Suppose we wanted to
build a 32-bit adder.
Let’s make two copies of the
high 16 bits of the adder,
one assuming the carry-in
from the low bits is 0,
and the other assuming
the carry-in is 1.
So now we have three
16-bit adders, all of which
can operate in parallel on
newly arriving A and B inputs.
Once the 16-bit
additions are complete,
we can use the actual
carry-out from the low-half
to select the answer from the
particular high-half adder that
used the matching
carry-in value.
This type of adder
is appropriately
named the carry-select adder.
The latency of this
carry-select adder
is just a little
more than the latency
of a 16-bit
ripple-carry addition.
This is approximately
half the latency
of the original 32-bit
ripple-carry adder.
So at a cost of about
50% more circuitry,
we’ve halved the latency!
As a next step, we could
apply the same strategy
to halve the latency
of the 16-bit adders.
And then again to halve the
latency of the 8-bit adders
used in the previous step.
At each step we halve the adder
latency and add a MUX delay.
After log2(N) steps, N
will be 1 and we’re done.
At this point the latency
would be some constant cost
to do a 1-bit addition, plus
log2(N) times the MUX latency
to select the right answers.
So the overall latency
of the carry-select adder
is order log(N).
Note that log2(N)
and log(N) only
differ by a constant
factor, so we
ignore the base of the
log in order-of notation.
The carry-select adder shows a
clear performance-size tradeoff
available to the designer.
Since adders play a big role
in many digital systems,
here’s a more carefully
engineered version of a 32-bit
carry-select adder.
You could try this
in your ALU design!
The size of the
adder blocks has been
chosen so that the trial
sums and the carry-in
from the previous stage
arrive at the carry-select MUX
at approximately the same time.
Note that since the select
signal for the MUXes is heavily
loaded we’ve included a buffer
to make the select signal
transitions faster.
This carry-select adder is about
two-and-a-half times faster
than a 32-bit ripple-carry
adder at the cost of about twice
as much circuitry.
A great design to remember
when you’re looking to double
the speed of your ALU!